doc/md: adding a guide about foreign key constraint drop (CD101) (#1509)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/mysql/cd-101.md

---
id: mysql-cd-101
title: Detecting drops of foreign key constraints on MySQL
slug: /guides/mysql/checks/CD101
tags: [linting, ci, destructive-change, mysql, drop-foreign-key]
---

## Introduction

This document describes in detail the detection of foreign keys drops for MySQL databases, 
using Atlas's linting capabilities.

A foreign key constraint can be dropped from a table using the following command:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_id;
```

Even though this action is not causing data loss and there might be good reasons to perform it on a production database, it can have negative and sometimes unpredictable side effects (some of them are explored below) which should be taken into consideration.
Atlas's linter can be used to raise a flag when a foreign key drop is about to be executed. Simply run:
```bash
atlas migrate lint --dir file://migrations --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" --latest 1
```

> The `--latest` flag tells atlas to inspect only the last migration. If the last migration file in your migrations directory contains a foreign key drop command, the last command will output something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--latest` flag tells atlas to inspect only the last migration file. If it contains a foreign key drop, the output will be something like:
```

```bash
20230305125128.sql: constraint deletion detected:

	L1: Dropping foreign-key constraint "owner_id"
```

> [Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the Atlas CLI Linter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the Atlas Linter.
```

Reviewer 2: Some of my comments were resolved, but the text was not changed (like this one).

## Impact of dropping foreign key constraints

### Data integrity

> Like mentioned above, a foreign key drop is not a destructive action, meaning it's not causing data loss. But it does have an impact on the **structure** of the data. In other words, this action won't change the data in the table, but it will change the way different tables interact with one another.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like mentioned above, a foreign key drop is not a destructive action, meaning it's not causing data loss. But it does impact the **validity** of the data. In other words, this action won't change the data in the table, but it will change the way different tables interact with one another.
```
The structure is the shape of the table, while dropping this constraint will make the content incorrect.

Reviewer 2: It can be written as "may affect the validity of the data" or use a different term to emphasize that the change is to the schema and not to the actual data.

Reviewer: "integrity" is what is used in database context

Author: sold

> Like mentioned above, foreign key drop is not a destructive action, meaning it's not causing data loss. But it does have an impact on the **structure** of the data. In other words, this action won't change the data in the table, but it will change the way different tables interact with one another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like mentioned above, a foreign key drop is not a destructive action, meaning it's not causing data loss. But it does have an impact on the **structure** of the data. In other words, this action won't change the data in the table, but it will change the way different tables interact with one another.
```

Suppose we have the following database:
<p style={{textAlign: "center"}}><a href="https://gh.atlasgo.cloud/explore/e3d188d0"><img src="https://atlasgo.io/uploads/users-pets.png" alt="Pets ERD"/></a></p>

 And we drop the foreign key between `pets` and `users` with the following command: 

```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_fk;
```

> Now, inserting data into the `pets` is still possible as before. But it is also possible to insert "invalid" data - a pet with an owner_id which doesn't exist in the `users` table. If such data is inserted, queries that relies on the foreign key to validate the data can fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, inserting data into the `pets` is still possible as before. But it is also possible to insert "invalid" data - a pet with an owner_id that doesn't exist in the `users` table. If such data is inserted, queries that rely on the foreign key to validate the data can fail.
```

### Irreversible changes
Dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. If data which would have been blocked by the constraint was inserted to the table, then the constraint cannot be re-applied without deleting the data.

In the example above, trying to re-create the constraint with:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets ADD CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id);

> ```

Reviewer: Add an invalid insert here so the user can follow along and the the same results you do.

Author: see next comment

may result in the following error:
```
(1452, 'Cannot add or update a child row: a foreign key constraint fails (`pets`.`#sql-1_f83`, CONSTRAINT `owner_id` FOREIGN KEY (`owner_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`))')
```

The only way the constraint could be applied again is by deleting all the invalid rows from the "pets" table.

> 

Reviewer: "Show by example": delete the invalid row and then try again and see it works.

Author: I thought about it, but it would complicate the example. I'll have to show the invalid data beforehand so I can then show what I'm deleting. I think it'll make the example messier.

### Cascading

> Cascading policies on foreign keys may be used for various reasons. For example, a deletion cascading can help saving storage space by automatically cleaning irrelevant ("orphan") data. Dropping a foreign key constraint also cancels all cascading policies, and thus can cause unwanted behaviours as side effect of the constraint drop itself.

Reviewer: not only saving storage. It may also be a mandatory requirement to drop dangling data, e.g. by some laws (like GDPR).

Author: I just gave it as an example

Reviewer: Yes. I think some more examples can help as well. This guide is meant to be a little more in-depth than the usual :-)

```bash
atlas migrate lint --dir file://migrations --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" --latest 1
```
The `--latest` flag tells Atlas to analyze only the last migration file. If it contains a foreign key drop, the output will be something like:

```bash
20230305125128.sql: constraint deletion detected:

	L1: Dropping foreign-key constraint "owner_id"
```

[Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the Atlas Linter.

## Impact of dropping foreign key constraints

### Data integrity
Like mentioned above, a foreign key drop is not a destructive action, meaning it's not causing data loss. But it does have an impact on the **structure** of the data. In other words, this action won't change the data in the table, but it will change the way different tables interact with one another.

Suppose we have the following database:
<p style={{textAlign: "center"}}><a href="https://gh.atlasgo.cloud/explore/e3d188d0"><img src="https://atlasgo.io/uploads/users-pets.png" alt="Pets ERD"/></a></p>

 And we drop the foreign key between `pets` and `users` with the following command: 

```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_fk;
```

> Now, inserting data into the `pets` is still possible as before. But it is also possible to insert "invalid" data - a pet with an owner_id that doesn't exist in the `users` table. If such data is inserted, queries that rely on the foreign key to validate the data can fail.

Reviewer 2: > queries that rely on the foreign key to validate the data can fail.

An example will explain it better IMO.

### Irreversible changes

> Dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. If data which would have been blocked by the constraint was inserted to the table, then the constraint cannot be re-applied without deleting the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. If data which would have been blocked by the constraint was inserted to the table, then the constraint cannot be re-applied without altering the data.
```

In the example above, let's insert some invalid data. assuming the `users` table is empty, we'll run:

```sql
INSERT INTO pets (name, owner_id) VALUES ('Fortuna', 1);
```

The, trying to re-create the constraint with:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets ADD CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id);
```

Will result in the following error:

> 

Reviewer 2: See the error format I used in https://atlasgo.io/guides/postgres/serial-columns#alter-column-type-to-serial

desired policies with regard to schema changes.

When using migrate lint to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:

* `--dev-url` - a URL to a [dev database](/concepts/dev-database) that will be used to simulate the changes and verify their correctness.
* `--dir` - the URL of the migration directory, by default it is file://migrations, e.g a directory named migrations in the current working directory.

### Changeset detection

When we run the lint command, we need to instruct Atlas on how to decide what set of migration files to analyze. 
Currently, two modes are supported:

* `--git-base <branchName>`: selects the diff between the provided branch and the current one as the changeset.
* `--latest <n>`: selects the latest n migration files as the changeset.

### Examples

Analyze all changes relative to the `master` Git branch:

```bash
atlas migrate lint \
  --dir "file://my/project/migrations" \
  --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" \
  --git-base "master"
```

Analyze the latest two migration files:

```bash
atlas migrate lint \
  --dir "file://my/project/migrations" \
  --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" \
  --latest 2

> ```

Reviewer 2: Remove from the guide please

Reviewer: https://atlasgo.io/guides/mysql/checks/DS103#changeset-detection

.. INSERT QUERY ..

Our statement will fail with the following error:

.. error message ..

We can drop the foreign key between `pets` and `users` with the following command: 

```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_fk;
```

Now, inserting data into the `pets` table is still possible, however it is also possible to insert "invalid" data. For example, assuming the `users` table is empty, the following command will not fail:

```sql
INSERT INTO pets (name, owner_id) VALUES ('Fortuna', 1);
```

Losing referential integrity can result in an unexpected impact on a system. For example, a query containing a`JOIN` statement that was previously guaranteed to return a result, may not return one in some cases:
```sql
SELECT
    pets.name,
    users.name AS owner_name
FROM pets JOIN users ON pets.owner_id = users.id
WHERE pets.name = "spidey";
```
After dropping the constraint, any code that relied on the invariant that pets are always linked to an existing owner may suddenly begin to fail.

### Irreversible changes

> It is also important to note that dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. Irreversible operations increase the risk of any change. This is because if something unexpected happens, it will not be possible to bring the system to its previous stable state. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is also important to note that dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. Irreversible operations increase the risk of any change. This is because if something unexpected happens, it is not possible to bring the system to its previous stable state. 
```

Continuing from our example above, if after dropping the foreign key constraint between the `pets` and `users` tables, we insert `pets` records that refer to a non-existing user, we will not be able to re-create the foreign key until these records are altered or deleted.

Following the previous example, trying to recreate the constraint will fail:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets ADD CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id);
// highlight-next-line-error-message
Cannot add or update a child row: a foreign key constraint fails (`pets`.`#sql-1_1140`, CONSTRAINT `owner_id` FOREIGN KEY (`owner_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`))
```

### Referential actions
Referential actions are policies that instruct the database what to do when referenced data is deleted or modified. For example, deletion cascading policies (which are applied by adding `ON DELETE CASCADE` to a foreign key definition) are used to clean any data referencing a deleted row. In our users/pets example above, adding a deletion cascading policy to the foreign key would mean that every time a user is deleted, the database will automatically delete all it's pets.  

> Cascading policies on foreign keys may be used for various reasons. For example, it can help save storage space by automatically cleaning irrelevant ("orphan") data. In other scenarios, organizations are often legally obliged to delete all the data related to a deleted user. This is commonly achieved with deletion cascading policies.

Reviewer 3: This sentence can be improved a bit, lets discuss tomorrow

---
id: mysql-cd-101
title: Detecting drops of foreign key constraints on MySQL
slug: /guides/mysql/checks/CD101
tags: [linting, ci, destructive-change, mysql, drop-foreign-key]
---

## Introduction

This document describes in detail the detection of dropping foreign keys in MySQL databases, 
using Atlas's linting capabilities.

A foreign key constraint can be dropped from a table using the following command:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_id;
```

While this is sometimes desired, dropping a foreign key can have negative and sometimes unpredictable side effects which should be taken into consideration.
Atlas's [`migrate lint`](/versioned/lint) command can be used to detect when a foreign key is about to be dropped. For example:
```bash

> atlas migrate lint --dir file://migrations --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" --latest 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
atlas migrate lint \
  --dir file://migrations \
  --dev-url docker://mysql/8/dev \
  --latest 1
```

incorporated in continuous integration pipelines to enable teams to enforce 
desired policies with regard to schema changes.

When using `migrate lint` to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:

* `--dev-url` - a URL to a [dev database](/concepts/dev-database) that will be used to simulate the changes and verify their correctness.
* `--dir` - the URL of the migration directory, by default it is file://migrations, e.g a directory named migrations in the current working directory.

### Changeset detection

When we run the lint command, we need to instruct Atlas on how to decide what set of migration files to analyze. 
Currently, two modes are supported:

* `--git-base <branchName>`: selects the diff between the provided branch and the current one as the changeset.
* `--latest <n>`: selects the latest n migration files as the changeset.

### Examples

Analyze all changes relative to the `master` Git branch:

```bash
atlas migrate lint \
  --dir "file://my/project/migrations" \
  --dev-url "docker://mysql/8/dev" \
  --git-base "master"
```

Analyze the latest two migration files:

```bash
atlas migrate lint \
  --dir "file://my/project/migrations" \

>   --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  --dev-url "docker://mysql/8/dev" \
```

---
id: mysql-cd-101

> title: Detecting drops of foreign-key constraints on MySQL

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: Detecting drops of foreign key constraints on MySQL
```

slug: /guides/mysql/checks/CD101
tags: [linting, ci, destructive-change, mysql, drop-foreign-key]
---

## Introduction

This document describes how Atlas's linter can be used to warn about dropping
foreign key constraints from a MySQL database.

> Let's demonstrate by creating a database with 2 tables - users and pets:

Reviewer 2: This introduction feels too short. See Rotem's article as an example: https://atlasgo.io/guides/mysql/checks/DS103#introduction

> Let's demonstrate by creating a database with 2 tables - users and pets:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's demonstrate by creating a database with two tables - `users` and `pets`:
```

```sql

> CREATE TABLE users (
>         id bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
>         name varchar(255) NOT NULL,
>         PRIMARY KEY (id)
>     );

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CREATE TABLE users (
  id bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  name varchar(255) NOT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (id)
);
```

CREATE TABLE pets (
        id bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
        name varchar(255) NOT NULL,
        owner_id bigint,
        PRIMARY KEY (id),
        CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id)
    );

> ```

Reviewer: Indentation is off. Also, did you generate that SQL or write it by hand?

Author: by hand

Reviewer: ensure to uppercase the keywords to stay consistent with what Atlas generates and what all the other snippets look like :-)

> Since we declared the foreign key constraint on the pets table,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since we declared a foreign key constraint on the pets table,
```

> the database will validate any data inserted to it - blocking insertion

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the database will validate all data by blocking the insertion
```

> of rows where the `owener_id` does not correspond to an `id` of an existing user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of rows where the `owner_id` does not correspond to an `id` of an existing user.
```

> of rows where the `owener_id` does not correspond to an `id` of an existing user.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
of rows where the `owner_id` does not correspond to an `id` of an existing user.
```

Now, let's add a new migration, dropping this constraint as described in the

> [MySQL documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/create-table-foreign-keys.html#:~:text=the%20foreign%20key.-,Dropping%20Foreign%20Key%20Constraints,-You%20can%20drop)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[MySQL documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/create-table-foreign-keys.html#foreign-key-dropping)
```

:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_id;
```

> This action, while won't cause data loss, can have some unpredictable side effects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While not causing any data loss, this cation can have some unpredictable side effects
```

> While not causing any data loss, this cation can have some unpredictable side effects

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While not causing any data loss, this action can have some unpredictable side effects
```

> (as described below). This is why we may want to run some inspection to provide us 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(as described below). This is why you may want to run some inspection to provide you 
```

Author: do you think I should change "we" to "you" everywhere?

> with some alerts when attempting to drop a foreign-key constraint.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
with some alerts when attempting to drop a foreign key constraint.
```

This can be achieved with Atlas's linter by running:

```bash
atlas migrate lint --dir file://migrations --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" --latest 1
```

> In our example, the last command will produce the following output:

Reviewer: Add a note about `--latest`.

```bash
20230305125128.sql: constraint deletion detected:

	L1: Dropping foreign-key constraint "owner_id"
```

> ([Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the atlas cli linter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
([Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the Atlas CLI Linter).
```

> ([Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the Atlas CLI Linter).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:::info
[Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the Atlas CLI Linter.
:::
```

## Impact of dropping foreign key constraints

Like mentioned above, dropping a foreign key constraint from a table is not a destructive
action, meaning it won't cause data loss. And yet, it can have some negative impact since 

> it influences the business logic of our system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it can influence the business logic of our system.
```
The BL is not necessarily encoded here as well. Also, add a small example maybe.

> action, meaning it won't cause data loss. And yet, it can have some negative impact since 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
action, meaning it won't cause data loss.  Yet, it can negatively
```

> it influences the business logic of our system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
influence the business logic of our system.
```

### Data integrity

Let's imagine we have a service which exposes a REST API on top of our database.

> Our service has an endpoint in `/pets/{id}` which is used to fetch the name and 
> the name of the owner of a pet, given its ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our service has an endpoint `/pets/{id}` which is used to fetch a pets name alongside the name of its owner.
```

> Our service has an endpoint `/pets/{id}` which is used to fetch a pets name alongside the name of its owner.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our service has an endpoint `/pets/{id}` which is used to fetch a pet's name alongside the name of its owner.
```

When calling this endpoint, the application is executing the following JOIN query:

```sql
SELECT
    pets.id,
    pets.name,
    users.name AS owner_name
FROM pets JOIN users ON pets.owner_id = users.id
WHERE pets.id = {id};
```

> Given an existing pet ID, our service (and it's consumers) may assume that this

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Given an existing pet ID, our service (and its consumers) may assume that this
```

query won't be empty. This is because the foreign key constraint makes sure that
the `owner_id` field will point to an existing row in the users table. But if we

> remove the constraint, we may find some pets with invalid owner IDs. Therefor, the 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
remove the constraint, we may find some pets with invalid owner IDs. Therefor3, the 
```

> query may return empty, potentially causing a failure in the application.

Reviewer: This is not 100% correct as the table definition does not state a NOT NULL on the owner_id which means there still can be a pet without an owner.

### Functionality issues

Some database features and behaviours depend on foreign key constraints. For example,

> we may add a cascading policy on our foreign key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we may add a cascading deletion policy on our foreign key:
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE pets (
        id bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
        name varchar(255) NOT NULL,
        owner_id bigint,
        PRIMARY KEY (id),
        CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id) ON DELETE CASCADE
    );
```

> The addition of `ON DELETE CASCADE` to the end of the foreign key declaration means

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By adding `ON DELETE CASCADE` to the end of the foreign key declaration, 
```

> then when deleting a user, all pets owned by it will also be deleted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
when deleting a user, all pets owned by the user will also be deleted.
```

> Our application's logic may relay on that behaviour. A real world example

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A real world example of this behavior
```

is an enterprise's legal obligation to delete all user info from its database

> when that user unsubscribes from the platform. This is often done with cascading.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
when that user unsubscribes from the platform, which can be easily achieved with cascading.
```

> Another example is relying on disk space to be cleared. Dropping the constraint means

Reviewer 4: I agree with Jannik, I would remove these last two sentences.

> preventing from the "orphan" data to be deleted, which can have negative implications.

Reviewer: That sentence seems off

### Irreversible changes

> Another issue with this kind of change is the fact that it may be impossible to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another issue with this kind of change is that it may be impossible to
```

> revert it in a production environment: If we dropped the constraint from a table 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
revert it in a production environment. If we dropped the constraint from a table 
```

and some "invalid data" has been inserted to it, we can't apply the constraint again

> (unless we delete / alter the data).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(unless we delete/alter the data).
```

## Prevention

Preventing accidental constraint drop is easy with Atlas's [`migrate lint`](/versioned/lint)
command. With the `atlas migrate lint` command, users can analyze the migration directory to 
detect potentially dangerous changes to the database schema. This command may be 
incorporated in continuous integration pipelines to enable teams to enforce 
desired policies with regard to schema changes.

When using migrate lint to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:

> * `--dev-url` - a URL to a Dev-database that will be used to simulate the changes and verify their correctness.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `--dev-url` - a URL to a [dev database](/concepts/dev-database) that will be used to simulate the changes and verify their correctness.
```

* `--dir` - the URL of the migration directory, by default it is file://migrations, e.g a directory named migrations in the current working directory.

### Changeset detection

When we run the lint command, we need to instruct Atlas on how to decide what set of migration files to analyze. 
Currently, two modes are supported:

> * `--git-base <branchName>`: which selects the diff between the provided branch and the current one as the changeset.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `--git-base <branchName>`: selects the diff between the provided branch and the current one as the changeset.
```

> * `--latest <n>` which selects the latest n migration files as the changeset.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `--latest <n>`: selects the latest n migration files as the changeset.
```

### Examples

Analyze all changes relative to the `master` Git branch:

```bash
atlas migrate lint \
  --dir "file://my/project/migrations" \
  --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" \
  --git-base "master"
```

> Analyze the latest 2 migration files:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Analyze the latest two migration files:
```

---
id: mysql-cd-101
title: Detecting drops of foreign key constraints on MySQL
slug: /guides/mysql/checks/CD101
tags: [linting, ci, destructive-change, mysql, drop-foreign-key]
---

## Introduction

> This document describes in detail the detection of foreign keys drops for MySQL databases, 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This document describes in detail the detection of dropping foreign keys in MySQL databases, 
```

using Atlas's linting capabilities.

A foreign key constraint can be dropped from a table using the following command:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_id;
```

> Even though this action is not causing data loss and there might be good reasons to perform it on a production database, it can have negative and sometimes unpredictable side effects (some of them are explored below) which should be taken into consideration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Even though this action does not cause data loss and there may be good reasons to perform it on a production database, it can have negative and sometimes unpredictable side effects which should be taken into consideration.
```

Atlas's linter can be used to raise a flag when a foreign key drop is about to be executed. Simply run:
```bash
atlas migrate lint --dir file://migrations --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" --latest 1
```

> The `--latest` flag tells atlas to inspect only the last migration file. If it contains a foreign key drop, the output will be something like:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `--latest` flag tells Atlas to inspect only the last migration file. If the file contains a foreign key drop, the output will be something like:
```

```bash
20230305125128.sql: constraint deletion detected:

	L1: Dropping foreign-key constraint "owner_id"
```

[Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the Atlas CLI Linter.

## Impact of dropping foreign key constraints

### Data integrity
Like mentioned above, a foreign key drop is not a destructive action, meaning it's not causing data loss. But it does have an impact on the **structure** of the data. In other words, this action won't change the data in the table, but it will change the way different tables interact with one another.

Suppose we have the following database:
<p style={{textAlign: "center"}}><a href="https://gh.atlasgo.cloud/explore/e3d188d0"><img src="https://atlasgo.io/uploads/users-pets.png" alt="Pets ERD"/></a></p>

 And we drop the foreign key between `pets` and `users` with the following command: 

```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_fk;
```

> Now, inserting data into the `pets` is still possible as before. But it is also possible to insert "invalid" data - a pet with an owner_id that doesn't exist in the `users` table. If such data is inserted, queries that rely on the foreign key to validate the data can fail.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, inserting data into the `pets` table is still possible, however it is also possible to insert "invalid" data. For example, adding a pet with an owner_id that doesn't exist in the `users` table. If such data is inserted, queries that rely on the foreign key to validate the data will fail.
```

### Irreversible changes

> Dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. If data which would have been blocked by the constraint was inserted to the table, then the constraint cannot be re-applied without deleting the data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. If "invalid" data exists in the table, which otherwise would have been blocked by the constraint, then the foreign key cannot be re-applied until this data is deleted.
```

> In the example above, let's insert some invalid data. assuming the `users` table is empty, we'll run:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the example above, let's insert some invalid data. Assuming the `users` table is empty, we'll run:
```

```sql
INSERT INTO pets (name, owner_id) VALUES ('Fortuna', 1);
```

> The, trying to re-create the constraint will fail:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, trying to recreate the constraint will fail:
```

```sql
ALTER TABLE pets ADD CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id);
// highlight-next-line-error-message
Cannot add or update a child row: a foreign key constraint fails (`pets`.`#sql-1_1140`, CONSTRAINT `owner_id` FOREIGN KEY (`owner_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`))
```

> The only way the constraint could be applied again is by deleting all the invalid rows:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The only way the constraint can be applied again is by deleting all the invalid rows:
```

```sql
DELETE FROM pets WHERE name='Fortuna';
```

> After running the last command, trying to add the constraint again will succeed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After running the last command, we will be able to successfully add the constraint again.
```

### Cascading

> Cascading policies on foreign keys may be used for various reasons. For example, a deletion cascading can help saving storage space by automatically cleaning irrelevant ("orphan") data. Dropping a foreign key constraint also cancels all cascading policies, and thus can cause unwanted behaviours as side effect of the constraint drop itself.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Cascading policies on foreign keys may be used for various reasons. For example, a cascading deletion can help save storage space by automatically cleaning irrelevant "orphan" data. Dropping a foreign key constraint also cancels all cascading policies, and thus can cause unwanted behaviors as side effects of the constraint drop itself.
```

## Prevention

> Preventing accidental constraint drop is easy with Atlas's [`migrate lint`](/versioned/lint)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Preventing accidental constraint drops is easy with Atlas's [`migrate lint`](/versioned/lint)
```

command. With the `atlas migrate lint` command, users can analyze the migration directory to 
detect potentially dangerous changes to the database schema. This command may be 
incorporated in continuous integration pipelines to enable teams to enforce 
desired policies with regard to schema changes.

> When using migrate lint to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When using `migrate lint` to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:
```

```bash
atlas migrate lint --dir file://migrations --dev-url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev" --latest 1
```
The `--latest` flag tells Atlas to analyze only the last migration file. If the file contains a foreign key drop, the output will be something like:

```bash
20230305125128.sql: constraint deletion detected:

	L1: Dropping foreign-key constraint "owner_id"
```

[Click here](/versioned/lint) for more information about how to use the Atlas Linter.

## Impact of dropping foreign key constraints

### Data integrity
Like mentioned above, a foreign key drop is not a destructive action, meaning it's not causing data loss. But it does impact the **integrity** of the data. In other words, this action won't change the data in the table, but it will change the way different tables interact with one another.

Suppose we have the following database:
<p style={{textAlign: "center"}}><a href="https://gh.atlasgo.cloud/explore/1b14810d"><img src="https://atlasgo.io/uploads/users-pets.png" alt="Pets ERD"/></a></p>

 And we drop the foreign key between `pets` and `users` with the following command: 

```sql
ALTER TABLE pets DROP FOREIGN KEY owner_fk;
```

> Now, inserting data into the `pets` table is still possible, however it is also possible to insert "invalid" data. For example, assuming the `users` table is empty, the following command will not fail:
> 
> ```sql
> INSERT INTO pets (name, owner_id) VALUES ('Fortuna', 1);
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: @rotemtam don't you think it's nice to have? if we give a full example readers can follow along to see the JOIN query fails for themselves.

Reviewer 3: i suggested to move this point above (with slight variation), you accepted that change

> Let's see an example where this can have impact on the system. The following `JOIN` query can return empty if the pets it queries has a "fake" owner:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Losing referential integrity can result in an unexpected impact on a system. For example, a query containing a`JOIN` statement that was previously guaranteed to return a result, may not return one in some cases:
```

```sql
SELECT
    pets.name,
    users.name AS owner_name
FROM pets JOIN users ON pets.owner_id = users.id

> WHERE pets.name = SOME_PET_NAME;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WHERE pets.name = "spidey";
```

```

> So after dropping the constraint, any code that executes this query and doesn't check if the output is empty can suddenly fail.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After dropping the constraint, any code that relied on the invariant that pets are always linked to an existing owner may suddenly begin to fail.
```

### Irreversible changes

> Dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. If "invalid" data exists in the table, which otherwise would have been blocked by the constraint, then the foreign key cannot be re-applied until this data is altered or deleted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

It is also important to note that dropping a foreign key constraint is not always a reversible operation. Irreversible operations increase the risk of any change. This is because if something unexpected happens, it will not be possible to bring the system to its previous stable state. 

Continuing from our example above, if after dropping the foreign key constraint between the `pets` and `users` tables, we insert `pets` records that refer to a non-existing user, we will not be able to re-create the foreign key until these records are altered or deleted.
```

Following the previous example, trying to recreate the constraint will fail:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pets ADD CONSTRAINT owner_id FOREIGN KEY (owner_id) REFERENCES users (id);
// highlight-next-line-error-message
Cannot add or update a child row: a foreign key constraint fails (`pets`.`#sql-1_1140`, CONSTRAINT `owner_id` FOREIGN KEY (`owner_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`))
```

> The only way the constraint can be applied again is by deleting all the invalid rows:
> ```sql
> DELETE FROM pets WHERE name='Fortuna';
> ```
> After running the last command, we will be able to successfully add the constraint again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ### Cascading

Author: @rotemtam I rewrote this part. please review.

> Cascading policies on foreign keys may be used for various reasons. For example, a cascading deletion policy can help save storage space by automatically cleaning irrelevant ("orphan") data. Another example: organizations are often legally obliged to delete all the data related to a deleted user. This is commonly achieved with deletion cascading policies. <br/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cascading policies on foreign keys may be used for various reasons. For example, a cascading deletion policy can help save storage space by automatically cleaning irrelevant ("orphan") data. Another example: organizations are often legally obliged to delete all the data related to a deleted user. This is commonly achieved with deletion cascading policies.   
```
Double spaces or 2 new lines are preferred over a `<br/>` tag.

Dropping a foreign key constraint also cancels all cascading policies, and thus can cause unwanted behaviors as side effects of the constraint drop itself.

## Prevention

Preventing accidental constraint drops is easy with Atlas's [`migrate lint`](/versioned/lint)
command. With the `atlas migrate lint` command, users can analyze the migration directory to 
detect potentially dangerous changes to the database schema. This command may be 
incorporated in continuous integration pipelines to enable teams to enforce 
desired policies with regard to schema changes.

When using `migrate lint` to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:

* `--dev-url` - a URL to a [dev database](/concepts/dev-database) that will be used to simulate the changes and verify their correctness.

> * `--dir` - the URL of the migration directory, by default it is file://migrations, e.g a directory named migrations in the current working directory.

Reviewer 3: missing:
https://atlasgo.io/guides/mysql/checks/DS103#changeset-detection
